Pride is a sense of worth derived from something that is not organically part of
us, while self-esteem is derived from the potentialities and achievements of
self.  We are proud when we identify ourselves with an imaginary self, a leader,
a holy cause, a collective body or possessions.  There is **fear** and
intolerance in pride; it is **sensitive** and uncompromising.  The less promise
of potentiality in the self, the more imperative is the need for pride.  The
core of pride is self-rejection.  It is true, however, that when pride releases
energies and serves as a spur to achievement, it can lead to reconciliation with
the self and the attainment of genuine self-esteem.

The autonomous individual is stable only so long as he is possessed of
self-esteem.  The maintenance of self-esteem is a continuous task which taxes
all of the individual's power and inner resources.  We have to prove our worth
and justify our existence anew each day.  When, for whatever reason, self-esteem
is unattainable, the autonomous individual becomes a highly explosive entity.
He turns away from an unpromising self and plunges into a pursuit of pride, the
explosive substitute for self-esteem.  All social disturbances and upheavals
have their roots in crises of individual self-esteem, and the great endeavor in
which the masses most readily unite is basically a search for pride.

So, we acquire a sense of self worth either by realizing our talents, or by
keeping busy or by identifying ourselves with something apart from us -- be it a
cause, a leader, a group, possessions or whatnot.  The path of self-realization
is the most difficult.  It is taken only when avenues to a sense of worth are
more or less blocked.  Men of talent have to be encouraged and goaded to engage
in creative work.  Their groans and laments echo through the ages.

Action is the high road to self-confidence and esteem.  Where it is open, all
energies flow toward it.  It comes readily to most people and its rewards are
tangible.  The cultivation of the spirit is elusive and difficult and the
tendency toward it is rarely spontaneous, whereas, the opportunities for action
are many.

The propensity to action is symptomatic of an inner unbalance.  To be balanced
is to be more or less at rest.  Action is at the bottom -- a swinging and
flailing of the arms to regain one's balance and keep afloat.  And if it is
true, as Napoleon wrote to Carnot, "The art of governance is not to let men grow
stale," then, it is an art of unbalancing.  The crucial difference between a
totalitarian regime and a free social order is, perhaps, in the methods of
unbalancing by which their people are kept active and striving.

We are told that talent creates its own opportunities.  Yet, it sometimes seems
that intense desire creates not only its own opportunities, but its own talents
as well.

The times of drastic change are times of passions. We can never be fit and ready
for that which is wholly new.  We have to adjust ourselves and every radical
adjustment is a crisis in self-esteem: we undergo a test; we have to prove
ourselves.  A population subject to drastic change is, thus, a population of
misfits, and misfits live and breathe in an atmosphere of passion.

